So in this section,
let's take a quick look at the data privacy laws and the concept of data privacy.
Data privacy in the United States is defined by the local HIPAA,
which stands for Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
A similar law was adopted in the European Union two years ago,
and it is called GDPR,
General Data Protection Regulation.
These laws, among other things,
define the concepts of personal health information and define the things;
the requirements that entities that deal with personal health information need to
comply with in order to transfer and store this information in a safe and secure way.
So let's take a bit of a closer look into what HIPAA means.
First, if you have taken the first course in this nanodegree,
which is AI for electronic medical records software,
it is covered there in quite a bit of a more detail than we cover it here,
but a quick recap.
HIPAA defines two things: privacy rule and security rule.
Security rule defines how the entities that
store protected patient information should store this information and transfer it,
and the privacy rule defines what is the personal health protected health information;
how exactly it should be protected.
HIPAA defines this concept of BAA or Business Associate Agreement,
which is an agreement that should be among
any two entities that transfer the data among themselves.
So for example, if your AI algorithm is deployed as a part of some system
and it taps into a clinical system and it
extracts protected health information and sends it back,
you will most likely as an entity,
need to have a BAA with that entity in order
to transfer this data into your system and transfer it back.
HIPAA defines the concept of
protected health information and we will look a little bit into what that means.
Also, as far as demystifying goes,
there is no such thing as HIPAA compliant algorithm or HIPAA compliance software.
HIPAA defines what PHI is,
but HIPAA does not define what exactly a software should be doing
to satisfy the requirements that HIPAA sets up in privacy or security rules.
So let us look at this excerpt from the HIPAA law.
This is where HIPAA law talks very explicitly about what is
protected health information and what can you do with de-identified health information,
because HIPAA defines the concept of de-identified health information.
You can see that protected health information is information,
including demographic data that relates to individuals past,
present, or future physical or mental health or condition.
It's information that relates to the provision of
health care to the individual or the past,
present, or future payment for the provision of health care to the individual.
At the same time, HIPAA says that there are
no restrictions on the use or disclosure of de-identified health information,
which has some implications to you as a data scientist.
HIPAA actually implies, if you are able to de-identify the information,
then you are free to use this information anyway you like, basically.
This is what allows us to have
all this data science competition and all the de-identified medical data,
which is available to us to train in the machine learning algorithms.
So let us look at the definition of protected health information as HIPAA defines it.
In this screenshot from the HIPAA law,
you can see that HIPAA is being pretty explicit
about what constitutes a protected health information.
It defines the 17 categories of information that should be protected.
These are things like names,
geographic subdivisions, telephone numbers,
social security numbers, biometric identifiers,
including fingerprints, and full face photographic images.
But there's also one interesting bit here at the end that says,
any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code.
Which basically means that if you think
that there is something that you are dealing with when you are
trying to de-identify a data set which is not covered by any of the 16 categories,
but which still could be identifying feature of a data,
then it is actually probably not okay to share this data.
This could be things like unique feature,
like unique anatomical variation,
or maybe some unique implant.
Or maybe you are dealing with a patient who
falls way outside the range on the high scale,
Maybe your data includes someone's full body CT scan,
and you can see that this person is seven feet tall,
and you know that there's only one person like that in the whole state,
that means that this data,
even though it will be compliant with all the 17 categories,
would still be considered as a protected health data.
After that, we will do a little exercise which will
help you try and de-identify a medical imaging data set yourself.